
John Fitzgerald Kennedy was one of the most influential people in history. Many people adored him because of his intelligence and his way with people.
On November 22, 1963, John Fitzgerald Kennedy was riding in Texas, in his car, when he was shot dead by Lee Harvey Oswald. Kennedy was a outstanding president, he also served time for his country. Kennedy was a very intelligent man, he His symbolic figure represented all the charm, vigor and optimism of youth as he led a nation into a new era of prosperity.
From his birth into the powerful and influential Kennedy 
clan, much was to be expected of him. Kennedy was born on May 
29,1917 in Brookline, Massachusetts. His father, Joe, Sr., was a 
successful businessman with many political connections. Appointed 
by President Roosevelt, Joe, Sr., was given the chair of the 
Securities and Exchange Commission and later the prestigious 
position of United States ambassador to Great Britain(Anderson 
98). His mother, Rose, was a loving housewife and took young John 
on frequent trips around historic Boston learning about American 
So 2
revolutionary history. Both parents impressed on their children 
that their country had been good to the Kennedys. Whatever 
benefits the family received from the country they were told, 
must be returned by performing some service for the 
country(Anderson 12). The Kennedy clan included Joe, Jr., Bobby, 
Ted and their sisters, Eunice, Jean, Patricia, Rosemary, and 
Kathleen. Joe, Jr., was a significant figure in young John's life 
as he was the figure for most of John's admiration. His older 
brother was much bigger and stronger than John and took it upon 
himself to be John's coach and protector. John's childhood was 
full of sports, fun and activity. This all ended when John grew 
old enough to leave for school.
At the age of thirteen, John left home to attend an away 
school for the first time. Canterbury School, a boarding school in 
New Milford, Connecticut and Choate Preparatory in Wallingford, 
Connecticut completed his elementary education(JFK 98). John 
graduated in 1934 and was promised a trip to London as a 
graduation gift. Soon after, John became ill with jaundice and 
would have to go to the hospital. He spent the rest of the 
summer trying to recover. He was not entirely well when he started 
Princeton, several weeks later in the fall of 1935. Around 
Christmas the jaundice returned and John had to drop out of 
school. Before the next school year began, he told his father he 
wanted to go to Harvard(JFK 98). On campus, young people took 
interest in politics, social changes, and events in Europe. The 
United States was pulling out of the Great Depression. Hitler's 
So 3
Nazi Germany followed aggressive territorial expansion in Europe. 
It was at this time that John first became aware of the vast 
social and economic differences in the United States. In June 
1940, John graduated cum laude(with praise or distinction) from 
Harvard. His thesis earned a magna cum laude(great praise)( JFK 
98). After graduation, John began to send his paper to publishers, 
and it was accepted on his second try. Wilfrid Funk published it 
under the title Why England Slept. It became a bestseller. John, at 
twenty-five, became a literary sensation. 
In the spring of 1941, both John and Joe, Jr., decided to 
enroll in the armed services. Joe was accepted as a naval air 
cadet but John was turned down by both the army and navy because 
of his back trouble and history of illness(JFK 98). After months 
of training and conditioning, John reapplied and on September 19, 
John was accepted into the navy as a desk clerk in Washington. He 
was disgusted and applied for a transfer. In June 1941, Kennedy 
was sent to Naval Officers Training School at Northwestern 
University in Evanston, Illinois and then for additional training 
at the Motor Torpedo Boat Center at Melville, Rhode Island. 
In late April 1943, Lieutenant John F. Kennedy was put in 
command of a PT 109, a fast, light, attack craft in the Solomon 
Islands in the South Pacific. Kennedy saw action in the form of 
night patrols and participated in enemy bombings. On August 1, 
1943, during a routine night patrol, a Japanese destroyer collided 
in the darkness with Kennedy's craft and the PT 109 was sunk. 
Through superhuman effort, the injured Kennedy heroically swam 
back and forth rescuing his wounded crew. Two were killed in the 
crash. The injury had once again aggravated his back. Still, 
Kennedy pushed on swimming from island to island in the South 
Pacific hoping for a patrol to come by. The lieutenant had no idea 
he had been in the water for eight hours. Finally, an island was 
spotted that could provided cover from Japanese planes. With no 
edible plants or water, Kennedy realized that he and the crew must 
move on. 
The next day, he once again attempted to search for 
rescue. After treading water for hours, the lieutenant was forced 
to admit no patrol boats were coming. He turned back for the island 
but was swept away by a powerful current. Kennedy collapsed on an 
island and slept. He recovered enough energy to return to the 
island and gathered the crew to move to another island in search 
of food. JFK was now desperate enough to seek help from 
natives on a Japanese controlled island. After making contact 
with the natives, Kennedy persuaded the natives to deliver a 
message written on the back of a coconut shell to allied forces. 
<br><br>
Words: 918
