
George Meade
Do you know who was the general for the Second Battle of Bull Run? Everyone kGeorge
Meadenowswhat the Second Battle of Bull Run is but who was the general? Some people
even knowthat the North won that battle. Most people do not know that General George
Meadedefeated General Lee at that battle. General George Mead accomplished much
duringwartime.General George Meade had many accomplishments during wartime. First
of all, hedefeated General Lee at the Second Battle of Bull Run. Why would not General
Meadecrush General Lee at this battle and end the war there? Facts say that heavy fog and
rainforced Meade to stop. Likewise, on June 1, !863 a surprise encounter forced his
troopsinto the Battle of Gettysburg, the greatest battle on American soil. This battle came
aboutwhen General Lee's army needed shoes. The two forces met here on accident and
fought toa victory for the North. Lee acknowledged his defeat and retreated to Virginia.
Not onlydid Meade serve in the Civil War, but also served in the Mexican War. He served
in thebattles of Palo Alto, Monterey, and Veracruz. During these he served under
GeneralZachory Taylor. To sum up, General George Meade accomplished many things
during histime at war. Each of General George Meade's accomplishments had one major
effect on howlife is today. To start, if Meade had not defeated Lee at the Second Battle of
Bull Run thewar would not have started off positively for the North. This was important
because thesoldiers gained their confidence when they won this battle. If the North would
have lostthe entire war the U.S. would be two different countries. Secondly, Meade's
defeat of Leeat the accidental Gettysburg. This was a battle that turned the war around
and gave theNorth the advantage. This was the North's first victory in a long time. Finally,
if the U.S.had not have won the Mexican War, Where Meade served as a soldier, the U.S.
would nothave gained the southwest portion of the country. This ,as you remember, was
where thegold rush took place that caused the country to spread out over the land. As has
beenshown, Meade's accomplishments had many effects on how life is lived today.There
are many things that would be different if George Meade had never lived. For one thing,
the North might not have won the first battle of the war causing the soldiersto lose
confidence and maybe lose the war. If the South had won the war the U.S. wouldbe split
into two countries right now. Also, if the north did not the greatest battle onAmerican soil,
Gettysburg, it could have been the end of the war right there at Gettysburg. If the North
would have lost the war the U.S. would be two different countries, as was saidearlier.
Last, if the U.S. had not won the Mexican War we would have lost some of ourland to
Mexico. The U.S. would have also not had the Gold Rush that took place inCalifornia. In
conclusion, the country would have been very different if George Meade hadnever
lived.General George Meade accomplished much during wartime. Most people do
notknow that Meade defeated Lee at the Second Battle of Bull Run . Some people even
knowthat the North won that battle. Everyone knows what the Second Battle of Bull Run
is butwho was the general?<br><br><b>Bibliography</b><br><br>Cleaves, Freeman. Meade, George Gordon.
Collier's Encyclopedia. Vol. 15.1989.Sefton, James E. Meade, George Gordon. The
World Book Encyclopedia. Vol.15. 1994.Meade, George G. Compton's Interactive
Encyclopedia. Version 2.01vw.Carlsbad, California: Compton's New Media, 1994.
CD-ROM.Meade, George Gordon. Encyclopedia Americana. Vol. 18.
Danbury,Connecticut: Grolier, 1990.Meade, George Gordon. Who's Who in American
History. Historical Volume.St. Louis,Missouri: Van Hoffman Press,1967.
<br><br>
Words: 607
