
Something about Charles Dickens and his ability to take his reader to unbelievable places 
with his imaginative powers allows him the honor of being the most popular English 
novelist of the 19th century. Dickens has thrilled his readers for many years with his 
down-to-earth stories about real people forced into real situations. Charles Dickens has 
the ability to tell his stories from personal experiences. He fine-tuned his ability to tell his 
own story through the life of another character or cast of characters. 
Born on the evening of February 7, 1812, Charles Dickens was the second child of his 
parents, John and Elizabeth Dickens.. Although he was a solitary child, Dickens was 
observant and good natured . Looking back on this period of his life, Dickens thought of it 
as the golden age (Carey 6). In the first novel that he wrote, The Pickwick Papers, 
Dickens tries to bring back the good old times as he remembers them with their 
picturesque nature. Gary Carey believes that this novel displays the happiness of innocence 
and the playful spirit of the youth during the time of Dickens's youthful days (7). 
Overtaken by financial difficulties, the Dickens family was forced to move into a 
shabby suburb of Camden Town. This move must have shown the family how good they 
had it back in Chatham. There Dickens was removed from school and forced to work 
degrading menial jobs in an effort to help his struggling father put food on the table. 
Dickens was put to work in a blackening factory among many rough and cruel employees, 
probably the worst job in town. Shortly after Dickens started working in the factory his 
father was thrown into jail for failure to pay his debts, only to be released three months 
later. This period of time affected Dickens greatly as he went into a period of depression. 
He felt abandoned and destroyed by this evil roller-coaster ride of life he was on. From 
this time period come many of the major themes of his more popular novels. Perhaps the 
most popular of these novels is David Copperfield. In this novel Dickens depicts a young 
man who grows up in a very similar way to that of his own (Allen 28). Dickens' sympathy 
for the victimized, his fascination with prisons and money, the desire to vindicate his 
heroes' status as gentlemen, and the idea of London as an awesome, lively, and rather 
threatening environment all reflect the experiences he had during his time on his own. On 
his own at the age of twelve, Dickens learned many necessary life skills which also 
developed in him a driving ambition and a boundless energy that transferred into every 
thing that he did (28). 
It would be a mistake to think of Charles Dickens as an uneducated man just because he 
had little formal schooling. Dickens did what everyone should do, learn from life. His 
entire writing career was a continuing process of development and experimentation. Many 
of his themes keep repeating themselves throughout his pieces and those themes most 
certainly stem from his early life. From his early Pickwick Papers to his one of his last 
pieces The Mystery of Edwin Drood Dickens never ceased to develop his writing abilities 
and skill, establishing himself as the major and primary Victorian novelist (Bloom 189). 
The journey from boyhood into manhood is a momentous one, and definitely something 
that has a lasting effect on one's person. Charles Dickens in his novel David Copperfield 
describes the journey into manhood by telling a story similar to his own life through the 
life of David Copperfield. There isn't one underlining theme in this novel there are many. 
The journey is one that along with David's is longing for what is lost in the past and the 
humiliation he feels from being an orphan. Dickens has written an excellent novel 
describing the troubles of growing up and the benefits of having a rough childhood. 
Through the rough experiences that he had, Dickens was able to look back on his early life 
and write world-famous stories about them. Calvin Brown feel that these experiences also 
helped shape the man the Dickens became, as do all experiences in life for everyone 
(Brown 144) 
The structure of Dickens's Copperfield has the freeness and the unity of a wonderful 
journey. As the scene moves from place to place in the story each move also represents a 
critical step in David's spiritual journey to manhood. Dickens uses the pattern of changing 
scenes to provide both variety and contrast of mood. The atmosphere changes as the story 
moves along from the Salem House to Blunderstone, giving the story diversity. Dickens 
constantly shows how the life of David would have been much easier had he had a decent 
father figure in his home while he was growing up. 
David is constantly searching for what he has lost in the past. He recalls the beautiful 
world of the Peggottys when he says, It seems to me at this hour that I have never seen 
such sunlight as on those bright April afternoons, that I have never seen such a sunny little 
figure as I used to see, sitting in the doorway of the old boat...(Copperfield 7) This 
writing of Dickens binds the reader to the story. David remembers the olden days and 
thinks of them as the golden days (Allen 28). 
As the beginning of the story describes, David Copperfield has many hard childhood 
experiences, such as Dickens's own humiliating days spent working in the blackening 
factory in London. The despair and humiliation that he suffered there and the rejection of 
his parents and the loss of all his hopes of self-fulfillment are relived through David in this 
book. Dickens tells his own story well through the life of David Copperfield. He isn't 
looking for the readers' sympathy. He simply wants the reader to understand that just 
because he had a rough life doesn't mean it was a bad one. 
A journey into adulthood, something that everyone must go through, although it may be 
easier for some than others. Charles Dickens, in David Copperfield, describes this journey 
as he makes the reader a vital part of David Copperfield's life. This journey is a theme in 
this novel as well as David's longing for what is lost in the past and the humiliation he 
feels from being an orphan. Dickens has developed his character, David, into a hero much 
like he wanted to be remembered as (Andreola 3). Many critics today think he achieved 
that goal! 
Charles Dickens also wrote many other books throughout his creative writing career. In 
his book A Tale of Two Cities, Dickens causes the reader to ask what the novel is really 
about, just what the driving theme is. Although each reader will come up with a different 
answer to this question, most of the answers fall into one of three categories. 
Some readers will say that this novel is about the different personalities of the many 
different and well-described characters throughout his novel. The story portrays a French 
physician, Dr. Manette, who has been wrongly put into prison in the Bastille for nearly 
eighteen years before the story even begins (Constable 24). Because he witnessed the 
aftermath of a crime that was committed by two other fellows, the doctor was thrown into 
prison. The entire prison experience is something that he can never fully shake free from. 
In moments of stress throughout the novel Dr. Manette often goes insane, a result of his 
time in prison. The story also concerns a man by the name of Jarvis Lorry, who, in the 
beginning of the book, is on his way to retrieve the doctor from the prison (Constable 13). 
Another group of readers will believe that this book is about the French Revolution. 
Dickens's A Tale of Two Cities starts out in 1775 while the Revolution was still in its 
underground preliminary stages. The book covers eighteen years ending with one of the 
bloodiest battles, the Reign of Terror in 1973. Although most of the major revolution 
events take place off stage in the novel, they do have a major effect on the lives of the 
characters in the story. It would certainly be no error to say the events of the French 
Revolution, which make up so much of the setting in this novel, is what the theme of the 
novel really is (Carey 11). 
The third category of readers will say the novel's theme is beyond the fictional characters 
and historical events and is more of a symbol. These readers will see that the actions relate 
to Dickens's vision of life and the reason for it. This group will say that the book presents 
a picture of human life using the dramatic language of characters and their actions (Carey 
12). 
Anyway that a reader approaches A Tale of Two Cities, it is a hard book to read although 
it does become interesting at times and in the end brings the reader into an understanding 
of personal life trials during the time of the French Revolution. Whether the reader 
believes that the novel is about its characters, historical events or symbolism, it doesn't 
matter. Charles Dickens wanted the readers of enjoy this novel not fight over what the 
meaning behind it is (Carey 12). 
Sadly, many of the greatest books that have strengthened and shaped Western civilization 
are drifting out of modern life and thought. But it doesn't have to be this way. Someone 
must responsibly keep the literary lights such as Charles Dickens burning brightly for the 
benefit of younger generations. (Andreola 2) 
It is time to rescue Dickens from the attic and let him stir the hearts of people today. 
Dickens can challenge, motivate, and entertain in ways the Hardy Boys never could. 
Dickens became famous writing stories that highlighted the difference between right and 
wrong in his own time. His stories invite readers to form an opinion and make decisions 
about a character's right or wrong actions. 
As only an artist could. Dickens paints a moral picture of life. To paint the moral for 
children is more effective than to point it. Here lays the help the younger generation of 
today needs to develop a moral imagination. 
When reading episodes from Dickens's stories it is easy to get to know his characters more 
intimately than neighbors. The experience of life along with his characters is something 
that the readers feel. Feelings arouse for them as the characters struggle in difficult 
situations (Andreola 2). 
In Terry W. Glaspey's Great Books of the Christian Tradition, he says, Dickens could 
sometimes be faulted for being overlong and sentimental, but his novels seem to lodge in 
the memory long after they are read. His ability to create a multitude of memorable 
characters gave us the adjective 'Dickensian.' His staunch Victorian morality is a pleasant 
contrast to our modern sense of moral drift. And what wonderful characters they are! His 
heroes are people of everyday life who supply readers with a vision of goodness (Andreola 
3) 
Clearly without the writing of Charles Dickens the literary world of today would be 
suffering a great loss. Dickens thought his many years of life experiences was able to use 
his talents as a writer to express to the everyday reader what the true meaning of life is. 
Charles Dickens did for the literary world what stories like that of small town basketball 
sensation, Larry Bird, did for small town athletes around the United States. Dickens 
helped readers understand themselves, those who are the common folk. Middle to lower 
class. 
<br><br>
Words: 1935
