
Jurrasic Park 
Richard Graczyk
JURASSIC PARK Crichton, Michael Publisher: Ballantine Books City
Where Published: New York Date of latest copy: 1990 Edition: First
Ballantine Books Edition: December 1991. 399 Pages, Hardcover I. A Brief
Summary of the Plot. A billionaire has created a technique to clone dinosaurs.
From the left behind DNA that his crack team of scientists and experts extract
he is able to grow the dinosaurs in labs and lock them up on an island behind
electrified fences. He has created a sort of theme park on the island which is
located off the west coast of Costa Rica. The island is called Isla Nublar. He
plans to have the entire planet come and visit his wondrous marvels. He asks
a group of scientists from several different fields to come and view the park,
but something terribly goes wrong when a worker on the island turns traitor
and shuts down the power. II. A Description of the Most Important Aspects
of the Contents. The main characters in the book are: John Hammond who is
a billionaire developer who has used his resources to create the dinosaur
filled island known as Jurassic Park. He is an old grandfather, and he dies in
the book by a dinosaur known as a Procompsognathus. Dr. Alan Grant who is
a renowned paleontologist who agrees to visit Jurassic Park only to find out it
is the home of several Dinosaurs. Unlike the movie Dr. Grant loves kids in
the book. He also had a of a beard. Dr. Ellie Sattler is a Paleobotinist and
Alan Grant who is among the first people to tour Jurassic Park. Tim who is
the 11 year old grandson of John Hammond. He is kind of geeky, into
computers and loves Dinosaurs. (Reminds me of myself.) His 7 older sister is
Alexis. She has a kind of tomboy attitude and loves base-ball Ian Malcom is
the Mathematician that uses Chaos Theory to predict disastrous results. he
only wears black and gray. He is presumably dead in Jurassic Park the book,
but miraculously is in the sequel, The Lost World. Finally there is Dennis
Nedry. He was the computer genius who's greed and ambition bring chaos to
Jurassic Park. There are many other characters that played a big part in the
book, but I thought they were the best and the plot revolved around them. The
characters show the greatest difference in the movie and the book. There
were many opposites in the characters and even the roles and elements of Tim
and Lex were reversed. The book starts off when some of the dinosaurs have
escaped form the island. John Hammond invites a group of scientists to the
park. He also invites his grandchildren. Denis Nedry took a bribe from a rival
company to get samples of Dinosaur DNA. In order to make his escape, he
turns the power off, even the electric fences. All hell breaks loose when the
humans try to warn a boat that it's transporting Dinosaurs to the mainland,
and run away from them at the same time. III. The Significance of the Book
to the Student. This book had plenty of significance in it, even though a lot of
the elements that were significant were hidden. First of all this book thought
us a few basic things about DNA. How it's the building blocks of life, and
stuff can be cloned. Like that sheep, Dolly. Also it taught us what some
scientific practices were about when different scientists visited the island.
Suchexamples are paleontologists, paleobotanists, and mathematicians. 1
other thing that this book teaches the student is that it is a prime example of
the differences between the movie and the book. And yes, the book was
better. IV. Evaluation of the Book. Personally, I thought this was a great
book. When I saw the movie, it was a blast. I loved the movie, but when I
read the book for the first time I was blown away. This has been the second
time I've read it and I must say it hasn't lost his touch. When I read the book
the first time I was rooting for the different characters and all, and the second
time I read it, it still kept those same elements. It still had it's flavor. That's
what I loved about this book. There is one thing I must recommend about this
book though. Read it as something for fun, not for school. And go at your
own pace, but read a lot, it's a big book. The experience of the book it much 
better then. 
<br><br>
Words: 764 
<br><br>
Words: 772
