
The book that I have read that has really stayed with me is Of 
Mice and Men by John Steinbeck. I really enjoyed reading it which is 
unusual because I usualy don't enjoy reading to much. There was 
something about George and Lennie's friendship that really made me 
think. Seeing how they were and how they shared life was really 
intresting. George didn't have to bother with Lennie, he could have 
abandoned him and gone on his own way. But he did not do that, he 
stayed with Lennie watching over him almost like a parent to a child. 
Even though Lennie always got Georege in trouble, George never stoped 
loving him and always stood by him. The friendship they shared
went beyond what was transparent they each shared a dream and both 
knew they ment the world to each other.
I felt that if these totaly different people could get along and 
look out for each other, why can't we get along with people who are 
different than us. They made me realize that I could learn something
from how to treat people who are differnt than me. What I also liked 
about it was the way they never stopped trying to reach their dream. 
This made me think that if they could work hard for there dream why 
can't I. It showed me that it does not matter were you come from or 
what you do, it is okay to dream and work as hard as you can to reach 
it.
For all it shows for friendship and loyalty it also shows how 
sometimes you have to do things you never thought you would do. For 
example in the end when George is forced to shoot Lennie in the
head you would never have thought he would do that, but you can see 
that under the circumstances he had no other choice. He only had two 
choices let the other people get to him first and watch them torture 
Lennie while he died a long horrible death or do it himself and get 
it over quick were Lennie did not know what hit him. This is also true 
in life, many times we are faced with tuff choices and even though 
they may be the hardest you will have to go through, you know that 
that is the only way. You come to the realization that everything you 
thought you was about, can all change with a blink of the eye.
<br><br>
Words: 414
