
Three important pharaohs are Thutmose III, Nefertiti and Senusret III.
Thutmose III lived from 3429 to 3375, died when he was 54 years old. 
Thutmose was probably the most interesting one of all them being that he
never lost a battle. He was a great Egyptian ruler. Along with being a great 
ruler he was also a great horseman, archer and a good athlete. He built the 
temple of Amun at Karnak. Thutmoses mother, Hatshesut took the throne 
from him. Although after his mother died Thutmose went around taking 
everything that his mothers name was on off and replacing hers with his.
Thutmose was faced with two people they were called Princes of 
Kadesh and Megiddo. The both of them put together had a very large and 
strong army. Thutmose immediatley set out with his army. Thutmose and his 
army crossed the Sinai dessert. They then marched into the city of Gaza. 
Thutmose's private secretary, Tjaneni kept records of everything that 
happened which was later copied and engraved on the walls of the temple of 
Karnak.
Many people claimed that Thutmose was a smart person of his time. 
Many people even called him a genius. He understood alot of things that many 
others didn't. He understood the logistics and lines of supply. Another thing he 
knew that others didn't, he was probably the first person to realize and 
actually use the sea-power with his army men. Thutmose conducted sixteen 
army men in Syria, Nubia and in Palestine. Thutmose was a national hero 
who was remembered way after his death. Thutmose has had some of the most 
powerful nations.
Another important pharaoh was Nefertiti. Little is know about 
Nefertiti. What we do know is that she was the wife to Akhenaten which was 
during the eighteenth dynasty. Some debate still remains on whether Nefertiti 
was the actual mother of Akhenaten and also his wife at the same time. 
The time when Akhenaten ruled, the religion changed alot. With the religion 
changing the people left behind the old gods. They then believed in heresy. It 
was wondered if it was Nefertitis descision or if it was Akhenatens to have a 
religion reform.
Akhenaten was appointed on her outside of the family. As a result after 
appointment to position of queen of Mamphis, Nefertit disappeared. It was 
assumed by many people that Nefertit was either banished or was dead.
Although little evidence actually shows she died.
Nefertiti was probably one of the best known queens of Egypt. 
Nefertiti was in many paintings and art work on monuments.Many people 
claim that she was a very beautiful person. There is no written record of her 
birth or death.
Another important pharaoh is Senusret III. Senusret III was also known 
as Sesostris III and Senwosret III. Senusret was the 5th king of the 12th 
Dynasty. he ruled for 37 years following his fathers death. It was believed 
that Senusret was 6'6' feet tall. Senusret was a great builder and a skilled 
military trooper One of his many building projects was a temple that was built 
in the honor of the war god Montu. Senusret built the largest pyramid of the 
12th Dynasty at Dahshur. The bad thing is that there isn't much left to see of it 
because it is falling apart.
Senusret led many army's to Nubia and to Syria. The one to Syria was 
believed to only be to look over the land. Senusret was later in his life 
worshipped as a god in Nubia. No one knows exactly why people worshipped 
him. There is no written record of when he died or even how he died
<br><br><b>Bibliography</b><br><br>
internet
<br><br>
Words: 603
