
Victor Frankenstein was very interested in natural philosophy and chemistry and
basically tried to play G-d by creating life. When he found the secret of activating
dead flesh, he created a superhuman being composed of rotted corpses. What he
did was considered unthinkable, and he was haunted by his own creation.
When the monster escaped, Frankenstein knew that he had to deal with the
consequences of what the monster might do. Frankenstein received a letter one day
which informed him of his younger brother William's murder, and immediately
suspected that he was responsible, for he was the creator of the hideous monster. A
friend of the family named Justine Moritz was the presumed murderer, and
Frankenstein was determined to prove her innocent. Circumstantial evidence,
however, led the courts to believe Justine guilty, because found in her pocket was a
photograph which had belonged to William.
Justine had been put to death, and Frankenstein had yet to find his creation. Finally,
upon their meeting, the monster confessed to his creator of what he had been
through, how he was rejected by society, and finally, how he had come to kill
William. When William had revealed his name to the monster, the monster
immediately figured that by killing the young boy, he would have revenge on
Frankenstein for giving him life. 
The monster did not understand the concept of right and wrong and he especially
didn't mean to kill anybody. His expression of anger ended up being violent, even
fatal to the victim, and it just worked out that he killed people. 
As the monster's story continued, he demanded of Frankenstein a female mate who
he can be with until his end, and promised to live away from society. Frankenstein,
meanwhile, tried to restore the monster's demented mind so he could live a normal
life.
Although at first Frankenstein agreed to create a friend for the monster, he changed
his mind for fear that between the two of them, his life, as well as many others,
would be in danger. The creature wanted revenge, and so everything important in
Frankenstein's life ended up being destroyed, including his wife and best friend. 
<br><br>
Words: 359
