
America, our great country, is strong, powerful, and influential. Americans exemplify positive values, selflessness, hospitality, and the American way of life. The mighty oak tree that stands taller, bigger, and older than all others best represents this grand country. Each part of the tree illustrates a facet of our nation. 
Shapely emerald leaves covering the tree symbolize the values many Americans hold concerning themselves, others, and their nation. Leaves help the tree grow and flourish just as our value of caring for our neighbors help us to unite and become more successful as a whole. The beautiful shade and distinct shape of these leaves make the tree more attractive and unique. Our values often differ from values of other countries due to cultural contrasts such as with religious, racial, and education issues. We give much more freedom than many other countries do to those of different races and religions. Also, he hold education in a much higher regard than other countries. It is these differences which sometimes make our country seem more appealing to those of foreign lands. Without leaves in the spring, the mighty oak would have no means of nourishment and would die. Our common American values bind us together as one unit just as all the leaves work together to benefit the oak. Without them we would be millions of separate bodies aimlessly wondering about a common ground, and our country would fall to pieces. Thus, there would be no country as there would be no tree. 
The lonely oak's long, gnarled limbs seem to reach out as far as they can just to touch another tree. One limb reaches far to the east until it finds a maple. Our brave troops fought in the east to fend off the Czechoslovakians and Serbians from nearly defenseless Bosnia. Another limb bends down and softly touches the fresh buds of a young sapling. Many Americans give years of their lives in South Africa to the Peace Corps to touch the lives and hearts of many villagers. Yet another limb seems to branch out in all directions with its twigs reaching both up and down and side to side. Every year, many Americans donate money to the Christian Children's Fund where it is then used to heal, feed, and educate poverty-stricken children all over the world. Just as our branches stretch out, so do our American arms to help those less fortunate.
There is a small, yet inviting hole in the front of the oak tree. It gives protection to the squirrels and birds from the harsh elements. Our country is one that encourages religious freedom without persecution for all ethnicities alike. Also, the cavity provides the animals a space to be free to live a life they choose. In America, once a person becomes a citizen he/she is free to be who he/she is and do what he/she will within lawful reason, creating a higher quality of life. The hole provides a starting point for the animals from which they will grow and move on. When foreigners emigrate to our land, they start off small, but are given the same chances to grow and be successful members of society. For the animals, the hole is like their ticket to a more prosperous and thus more enjoyable life just as our country serves as a land of opportunity for so many less fortunate. 
Small acorns that are produced by the tree and those that lie on the ground portray the lives of America's youth. The mighty oak births many acorns with hopes that they will spring forth into new trees. Every few minutes another child is born with the opportunity to become a functional part of our society. However, like the acorns, some do not make it. They simply die too early to be something great. The ones that do make it will become our leaders of tomorrow. Once the acorns reach a certain age, they fall to the ground detached from their life line. A simple fact of American life, like all other life, is that everyone that is born must die at one time or another. Birth inevitably brings death. From the fallen acorns come new trees as if it were a miracle. In the cycle of life, death also brings life. Our elderly pass, allowing for room for the hopeful new generation to begin. Like a circle that never ends, life goes on. 
Through the figurative picture of a magnificent oak tree with marvelous leaves, extensive branches, a cordial aperture, and intricate acorns, we can take a look at the many positive aspects of our country and begin to appreciate what we have as opposed to those who have nothing at all. It is usually what we do not have that we want, but when we begin to appreciate what we do have, we stop wanting so much for ourselves but for others to have more. That is perhaps the characteristic of America that has made us the greatest country in the world- the tallest oak in the forest.
<br><br>
Words: 842
