
Michaela Daugherty
Writing 121 
Assignment # 1
M-W-F 2:00pm
HIDDEN BEHIND CLOSED DOORS
Every day of their hectic week, women all over the world are being summoned to a dark dreary dungeon. Women of all ages, race, creed or economic status are not immune to this fear. We as women must all endure this torture. Where would you find this dungeon, women descend to virtually 365 days a year? The answer will surprise you, since the majority of women find these dungeons in their own homes. Builders call these darkened walls a laundry room. How can we as women change these dark walls into bright and cheerful rooms? We look to the advertisements in our local magazines for help. In a recent publication of Family Circle magazine, the advertisers of Clorox 2 Bleach-Free, have chosen to use vibrant colors, two animated laundry bottles and bold print to erase the idea that doing laundry needs to be a dark and lonely chore 
The top two-thirds of this advertisement depicts a white washing machine with a white tiled back splash, faded softly into the background. Also faded into the background, a bouquet of pink flowers with green leaves which decorates the upper right hand corner of the ad. The advertisers hope your subscious will pick up these props. But the main focus of this ad, (for your Conscience) are two life-like laundry bottles. On top of the faded washing machine is a neatly stack of brightly colored clothes. With the sun&#8217;s reflection shining upon these two bottles, the reader is given the impression a laundry room does not need to reflect a dark dungeon. These vibrant colored laundry bottles seem very cheerful with smiling faces and raised eyebrows. Each displays its own individual packaging labels. The two bottles are apparently engaged in a pleasant conversation. The laundry bottle on the left, Ultra Clorox 2, having the vibrant blue container with a red head (lid) has her arm (handle) behind the second bottle. Advertisers want consumers to view laundry as a friendly gathering with friends not as a chore. The Clorox 2 Bleach-Free bottle decorated with a vibrant green bottle and yellow head (lid) has her arm (handle) strategically pointing to her label. Above these two life-like bottles, read in black bold letters &#8220;You&#8217;re brilliant, Bleach-Free!&#8221; You will be brilliant also if you use this product. In smaller letters and less boldness the Ultra Clorox 2 bottle states, &#8220;You clean and brighten colors just like me.&#8221; In response the Clorox 2 Bleach-Free bottle, replies, &#8220;But I use enzymes instead of bleach.&#8221; Below these two bottles are three sentences which strengthen the idea of buying Clorox 2 Bleach-Free. To summarize this laundry booster has special stain fighters; color brightners and uses enzymes instead of bleach to remove dirt and stains. The ad then closes with Bleach-Free Clorox 2 laundry Booster printed in bold black type with a bottle and a box of Clorox 2 Bleach-Free to the right.
The market, advertisers of this ad most want to target are Women. This is depicted by the use of women&#8217;s facial attributes on both of these friendly-smiling lids. Also this ad which appeared in the Family Circle magazine supports the assumption women would be reading this ad. Of course, Men may want to purchase this magazine at their local super-market and read for themselves the ad for Clorox 2 Bleach-Free. It is assumed, men would rather be reading a hunting or car magazine and not worrying if their laundry had a boost. The ad targets women who are concerned with dirt and stains. Women do not want the smell of bleach on their clothes nor on their loved ones. Women worry about the appearance of their children and spouse. Why, because society places a great importance on appearance. 
Why would advertisers use the knowledge of psychologist in this ad? For the simple reason, psychologist have proven, the power of emotions are strong. Take for example, the lifted eyebrows and smiling faces. Psychologist will tell you the ways in which we feel and express emotions actually represent a form of communication. Communicating emotions can motivate action by others. Do you smile back at someone who has smiled at you first, or been sympathetic when someone around you demonstrated sadness? Raised eyebrows are non-verbal inviting signs. Look at men or women who want to get your attention without actually using words. They use a smile with their eyebrows raised inviting a positive feedback from you. Seeing these two encouraging, smiling bottles in this ad, advertisers hope you will remember when you are walking down the laundry aisle of your local market and smile while you place the booster in your cart.
With analyzing the faded bouquet of flowers, the advertisers are playing with your subscious. Advertisers hope that by sensory association you will associate the sweet fragrance to how your laundry will smell by using their product. When it comes to the white back splash and the washing machine the same principals apply. Advertisers are hoping that you associate the whiteness of these two items to how your laundry will come out of your washing machine, clean and dirt free.
By using these friendly animated laundry bottles advertisers have created a myth. They want consumers to believe laundry would be fun when shared with friends. Advertisers know you rarely have company when doing your laundry or that doing laundry is actually fun. Another myth, would be, you would be considered a bad person if your laundry does not come out clean. Of course you will still be considered a good person, even though your laundry may have stains.
Do you stand in your dark, dreary dungeon, tied to sorting your whites from colors, delicate from permanent press and of course your knits from your cottons? Are you worried those dirty knees on your favorite jeans will come clean or if that barbecue sauce will be removed from your new pink cotton shirt? Just the worry will my colors come out bright might give any woman a migraine headache. Then add to the stress, what detergent should I use, do I use bleach or a bleach alternative or do you wonder if you need a laundry booster? This in itself could send any rational person to the hospital. Bleach-free Clorox 2 has made the choice simple for you. Just add this special stain fighter and color brightener, and erase that feeling that doing laundry is a dark or lonely chore. The advertisers for Clorox 2 Bleach-Free have used animated laundry bottles, and vibrant colors to entice you to buy this product? Will you give your laundry a boost?
<br><br>
Words: 1109
