
Times have changed dramatically in
the past thirty years. The style of living, the sizes of families,
and education have all changed dramatically. During the
fifties, sixties, and most of the early seventies teenagers
were thinking about going off to war or starting a family.
Very few teenagers coming out of high school were
thinking about college. Slowly as times started to change,
more and more people were going off to college. Today at
the end of the nineties, very few people do not go off to
college. Instead of high school students thinking about
starting families or going off to war, they have a bigger
decision to make. What college to attend. This decision will
affect one's entire life; how they live, where they work,
what size family they are going to have, and sometimes
whom they will marry. Today, choosing a college is almost
one of the biggest decisions one would have to make. The
answer to this question will affect them for life. Finding a
good job in the workforce is getting more difficult as time
goes on. Employers are looking for individuals who are
smart and can add something to the company; the
competition is fierce. They are no longer accepting
teenagers right out of High School. They are looking for
people in their mid- twenties with a four-year degree,
sometimes even a graduate level degree. Many hypothesize
that this is because companies are paying their employees
more. Another hypothesis is that they are trying to move
forward. These companies are trying to expand on what
they already have. There is a race to become the biggest
and the best. Therefore, they are looking to college
students who are specialized and know about the field.
They are willing to pay college graduates a lot of money
because they have faith that they will earn it back. During
the fifties, sixties, and early seventies companies were
happy to be getting anyone. With the wars going on and the
protests for peace, most fresh workers were occupied.
These companies were willing to pay and train anyone that
might have been interested. Their selection was not as great
as it is now. The selection of workers today is enormous.
Therefore, college students today have to work harder to
appear better than the next person. They need to sell
themselves on paper. It is hard to do this without a good
college name on one's resume. One should keep in mind all
that has changed in thirty years. Imagine what can change in
four years. The difficulty of getting a job could increase.
With that, the amount of people applying for the same job,
with the same qualifications can also increase in difficulty.
The power of a good education should not be
underestimated; in many cases, it means a good future.
<br><br>
Words: 474
