
The book that I read was The Eyes of the Dragon. The author was Stephen King. It was
published in 1987. Stephen King grew up in Maine and has lived most of his adult life
there, both in Bangor and in the Portland area. He and his wife, Tabitha, have three
children, Naomi, Joe, and Owen Philip.
This story took place in the fairy tale times with Kings and Dragons. The kings
name was Roland. He was a good king. He had two sons. Peter, the first son, was good
at every thing and his father and every one else loved him. Thomas was just a reject. He
had no friends and his Father didn't even care for him. Flagg was the Magician. Flagg
was trying to manipulate the kingdom so that he could end up in control and after 5000
years his chance had finally come. He killed Roland and framed Peter so that he would
have to go to jail for life. Thomas was then king and Flagg was his friend and teacher. 
Flagg taxed the town and beheaded people for anything that they did. The title of the
book came from the passage that Flagg had shown Thomas that lead to the head of a
Dragon head that was hanging in his fathers room. He saw Flagg poison his father and he
was to scared to tell anyone. Any way, Peter excapes and kills Flagg.
Thomas was just a followed of any one who would be his friend. He was stupid
and he never expected to be king so he didn't pay attention in class. Peter was the perfect
son. He won all of the castle competitions. Every body in the entire kingdom loved him.
Flagg was just plain evil. Every thing he did, he did for the good of evil. He finally got his
way with the world and he took complete advantage of it.
Stephen Kings style is to keep the reader from knowing to much and in some
places in the book it gets very boring and then every thing starts to pick up. I like his style
because it reads very quickly and is very entertaining.
I think that this is one of the better books that I have ever read. I would
recommend it to any one who has a brain in their head
<br><br><b>Bibliography</b><br><br>
na
<br><br>
Words: 392
