
In the book, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Huck rejects “sivilized” life. He
dreads the rules and conformities of society such as religion, school, and anything else that
will eventually make him civilized. He feels cramped in his new surroundings at the
Widow Douglas’s house. He would rather be in his old rags and sugar-hogshead because
he was free and satisfied. He felt out of place when he tried being “sivilized” because he
grew up fending for himself and to him it felt really lonely.
Huck Finn grew up living in the woods and pretty much raised himself because his
pap was a drunk. He never had a civilized lifestyle and he believed that his way of living
was good enough for him. He was free to do what ever he liked and that is how he
learned to live. He did not believe in school because all you need to know to live is not
found in a book that you read at school. He believed that you learned by living out in the
wild. Huck would rather be an individual than conform to society.
Huck would rather follow his heart then his head and because of this Huck is ruled
as a bad person because in society your suppose to use your head. Huck is being
penalized for his beliefs and he does not want to be apart of a lifestyle that does not
support his ways. For instance his choice not to turn in Jim shows that Huck understands
why Jim is escaping. Huck sees Jim as a friend not as a slave and so he truly is able to see
that society’s way of treaty Jim is wrong. Huck is portrayed as a boy who sees life at face
value and not by the set “standards” of the “sivilized” society.
The rejection of the “sivilized” lifestyles shows that Huck does not agree with it
rules. Because of this, he is able to see life from different perspectives. He can
sympathize with all the class in society. He learns to figure out what is morally correct
and wrong. Through out his journey down the river, Huck is able to learn more about
himself and others. His adventures has taught him more than he will ever learn just by
reading books. Huck is able to live a great life just by reacting to situations as they come
along. Huck is better off not living a “sivilized” lifestyle because that is how he learns.
Huck’s rejection of a “sivilized” life can be seen as being rebellious, but as you
read more and more about Huck’s adventures, you come to the realization that this has
helped Huck to become a well rounded person. Huck is a practical and realistic person
who grows more and more as he deals with every situation he is put in, but during his
time, it was not right for a child to be on his own because they are too young to know
anything and they need guidance through school and religion. Even though Huck is
young, he has learned a lot by reading and by self-study. Huck believes in being free so he
can able to adjust to situations rather than living a set life. Huck learns without the help of
school and other forms that will eventually make him “sivilized”and he intends to keep it
that way and therefore he runs away from the “sivilized” society. Huck learns from his
actions and mistakes and not from others and that is how he grows mentally and
physically.
<br><br><b>Bibliography</b><br><br>
running away from sivilized society
<br><br>
Words: 594
