
Although Mademoiselle Reisz seems to be relatively insignificant in The Awakening, she has a profound influence on Edna. Mademoiselle Reisz is one of the only characters in the novel who can understand Edna's true character. Reisz inspires Edna to have a courageous soul that dares and defies (63).
Mademoiselle Reisz influences Edna by acting like a sanctuary for her. When Edna feels bored, it would be in such a mood that she would hunt up Mademoiselle Reisz (58). When Edna returns to the city, she is compelled to visit Mademoiselle Reisz. When she visits Mademoiselle Reisz, her boredom is lifted away by Reisz's music and Robert's letters to Reisz. Edna loses herself when Mademoiselle Reisz plays music (64). Mademoiselle Reisz makes Edna feel happy by allowing her to read letters from Robert. Edna's eyes fill with delight when Mademoiselle Reisz shows Edna the letters (80). Seeing how happy Mademoiselle Reisz is as a non-married artist inspires Edna to be more independent and to pursue her desire to paint. This relates back to the meaning of the novel -- a woman's struggle for individuality while still being married. By spending time with Mademoiselle Reisz, Edna realizes that in order to be a separate self she cannot have the burdens of marriage and children (18).
Mademoiselle Reisz also motivates Edna's endeavors. Mademoiselle Reisz encourages Edna to be her own individual. One way in which she does this is by defining the requirements for a genuine artist, to be an artist includes much; one must possess the courageous soul, she says (63). Since Edna wishes to become a genuine artist, these words melt into her soul (63). When Reisz says this to Edna, she is not just informing her that an artist is one who paints, but she is also implying that an artist is one who is willing to surpass the borders of society. Although Edna tries to surpass the borders of society, in the end she was not an artist since she took her life because she could not meet the requirements for a genuine artist. She was unable to surpass the borders of society to be her own person.
Mademoiselle Reisz advises Edna on love. Reisz tells Edna that Robert loves her: it's because he loves you poor fool (63). She also explains the reasons for Robert's absence. According to Mademoiselle Reisz, Robert is gone since Edna is not free to listen to him or belong to him (63). Mademoiselle Reisz pacifies Edna by talking about Robert and love.
Mademoiselle Reisz contributes to the meaning of the novel by being able to recognize Edna's awakening. By influencing Edna to be an artist, Mademoiselle Reisz helps Edna find the strength to be a courageous individual that can dare and defy (116). Unlike Mademoiselle Reisz, Edna cannot find the space and solitude that she needs to be an individual (26). Space and solitude are things that Edna cannot have on land since she is responsible for looking after her husband and children (26). Her family is a burden to her individuality. Edna also realizes that her individuality is more important to her than family. Edna faces her fate, and lifts her white body (115) away to the sea where she can find her space and solitude (26).
<br><br>
Words: 546
