
English Essay # 5
I believe that a career or profession should be chosen with great care and that it should not be taken lightly. A career or profession should be something that you enjoy doing because you will be doing it for many years to come. So I took time and care when deciding what I wanted to do for the rest of my working career. 
The reason I chose to be a We Administrator is because I enjoy spending time on the Internet and that’s where everything is happening and changing from day to day. This career is also in great demand and is something I do currently for fun, so why not get paid for it? I believe that I am a great speaker and as a web administrator I would be able to voice my opinion out to the large masses of people. There is also ample opportunity in this field and I don’t believe finding a job in this profession would be of great difficulty. Looking for work would be simple, especially after attending a great college such as yours. This would give me a degree I would need to prove that I know what I am doing. Instead of just claiming to know what I am doing this experience would give me the opportunity to prove it. I know that in the future to survive it will be necessary to have a computer skill. So if this statement is true then it will be much easier for me to survive in this society if I have a good skill in this job field. This is also a skill I intend on passing on to my kids and so on. I know that we are still at the beginning of the computer age and I want my kids to know how it all started. I don’t want the history of the computer and the Internet to be lost. I know that with proper training I can make a huge contribution to any business I step foot into that is computer originated. I believe that taking the courses that I am applying for that I will be able to get a great job and make a career out of it. This will hopefully allow my to live a rich and prosperous lifestyle. 
These are the things that hope for my future and my career. This is what I plan to do with my education and the importance I put on it. Thank you for taking the time to read my hopes in the future in attending your college.
<br><br>
Words: 432
