
In Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales there are twenty-nine plus one characters. Out of the twenty-nine plus one characters two will be compared and contrasted. The Friar and the Miller have some similarities and at the same time some differences.
The Friar and the Miller show a few similarities in Canterbury Tales. They are both very strong and able to head butt things without a problem. The Friar was,” strong enough to butt a bruiser down”(94). The Miller was,” Broad, knotty, and short-shouldered”(109)”he would boast he could heave any door off hinge and post, or take a run and break it with his head”(101). The Friar and the Miller both played musical instruments in Canterbury Tales. The both of them also had a way of cheating people out of their money
The are also a few differences the Friar and the Miller show. The Friar, for instance, was part of the church; the Miller was not. Also, the Friar has a name, Hubert. The Miller does not have a name. The instrument the Friar plays isn’t the same as the Miller. The Friar,” played the hurdy-gurdy,”(95) and also the harp. The Miller,” He liked to play his bagpipes…”(101) Even though they had ways of cheating people out of their money they had different ways of doing it. . The Friar would hear confessions from the wealthy for a good price and,” The Friar was also the finest beggar of his hatch”(95). The Miller had,” A thumb of gold, by God, to gauge an oat”(101)! The Miller would press down on the weighing scale to make the oat weight more. Therefore making the oat cost more.
In Canterbury Tales there are twenty-nine plus one characters. Out of the twenty-nine plus one characters, the Friar and the Miller are compared and contrasted. Out of this comparison and contrasting the outcome showed how the Friar and the Miller are alike and somewhat different. Even though they do some of the same things like cheat innocent people out of their money, they do it in different ways which make them have differences.
<br><br>
Words: 347
