
AMERICA
America is the land of opportunity. This country is full of great ways to better our lives. There are many different kinds of opportunities we can use to improve the quality of our living conditions. For example, there are many public school systems here, as well as the many college opportunities we are offered. This country is also a great place to find adventure, or just have a good time playing sports or exercising. Something else that is great about our country is our fantastic government system. Whether it's Federal, State, or Local government; ours is one to be proud of. America offers the most to any kind of person, no matter who you are or what you enjoy.
In America there is an unbelievable amount of ways to learn. There is a public school system where anyone can go to school, Kindergarten through twelfth grade. If you want to further your education by going to college, there is a great variety of schools you could go to. If you want to be a doctor there are specific schools designed to teach people how to be doctors. Some colleges are good at different sports, and some are incredible acedemically, some schools are well-known for their drama programs or other things. Most schools offer scholarships to those who excel in specific areas. Scholarships are a good way to get financial aid if you can't or don't want to pay for college.
If you're looking for action and adventure, you've come to the right place. America is the greatest place to kick back and have a good time. You could ski the icy slopes of the Rocky Mountains in Utah and Colorado, or you could surf and lay out on the sandy beaches of Hawaii or California. You could go crabbing on the rocky coast of Maine, or go ice fishing on a barren lake in the nippy weather of Alaska. Different places around the country offer a variety of seminars if you're looking for instruction, or you could read up on the subject before braving the great outdoors by yourself. Many people also enjoy sports. In Utah, there are all kinds of sports programs designed for people of all ages. This is a great place to come whether you're looking for sports action or outdoor adventure.
Some might worry about the quality of our government. Despite the recent problems our president has had, the government is nothing to worry about. The local government is here to help us in any way needed. The local government helps us out with our school systems, roads, and many other things. The Federal government helps pass laws to make our states and towns better for us. All in all, the government is still going just as strong as they were in the beginning in 1776.
Taking all the factors into consideration, I think America is the greatest place on earth to live. No matter what you want to do, where and when you want to do it; you can probably find it here. Whether you want to further your education, find a passion in some sort of outdoor adventure, or discover the mystery behind our government, this country is where you'll want to be. America truly is the land of opportunity.
<br><br>
Words: 548
