
Chris Callahan March 13, 2000
Per 2 History
European Imperialism
Between 1875 and 1914, parts of Africa, Asia, and Latin America came under influence of Imperialism. Imperialism is the domination of the political, economic, and cultural life of one country or region by another country. Imperialism was a self-sufficient way of living. European's wanted a self-reliant way of living and gained control of smaller countries and regions to spread influence throughout the world. Imperialism has helped countries build better technology, increase trade, and has helped to build large and powerful militaries.
Technology skyrocketed during imperialistic times. Money was available to research and develop new products. New technology made it possible to produce goods in enormous quantities. This cause larger profits. Roads and railroads were built in Africa. They were used mostly to connect European settlements to the coast. They also served to make African products available to the world market. Medicine was also introduced to help people live longer and healthier lives. Technology has been a major factor in the growth of settlements. Technology is needed to better our societies. 
Another benefit of Imperialism is increased trade. Increased trade brings more money to the colonies, which in turn boosts the economic state of the colonies. Settlements would now be able to raise the living standards and build schools, farms, and communal facilities. (add more)
Imperialism can help military power in the colonies to grow. This means that less and less wars would take place. A larger military also means more jobs for citizens. A larger military also means better protection from local territories. (add more)
Overall, Imperialism has helped almost all the settlements in which it has been practiced. Imperialism has helped better technology, has improved trade, lowered taxes, increased profits of people, helped gain raw materials, and has helped the military grow. All of this has helped Europe grow economically. 
Conclusion:
The sun never sets on the British Empire
<br><br>
Words: 320
