
Jacksonian Presidency Summary
Despite the looming effects of the Jacksonian presidency, the following only discusses the actions and results, which occurred during the Jacksonian presidency. The activation of a new presidency was accompanied by huge numbers of Hickoryites (Jacksonian supporters) and official hopefuls. Many of these hopefuls were granted their desire of holding office, which is one of the changes brought into Washington by Andrew Jackson. The major accomplishments of Jackson during his presidency pertain to his rural upbrining and democratic beliefs. Jackson’s major accomplishments were his nationalization of the spoils system, his liberal application of Jeffersonian democratic policy, and his achievement of the status of president. Firstly, prior to the presidency of Andrew Jackson, the system of appointing officials was under the “ideal of holding office during good behavior”, which led to the holding of positions by aged and incapable politicians. Conversely, Jackson appointed officials from all walks of life to promote the equality principles of democracy. Jackson also advocated “rotation in office”, which meant allow as many people serve in office for the shortest possible time for experience was discounted as a governing skill. Although these principles seem to follow the guidelines of democracy they were not entirely responsible and often the appointment of officials did not fall under these jurisdictions. The selection of officials of Jackson was in many cases the return of a financial grant during campaigning. The consideration of ability to govern, intellegence, resposiblity, etc. were ignored in the wake of compensation. Although opposites alike were granted power they were not always for the continuance of democracy. Secondly, Jefferson was the most democratic of any president at that time to come to power. In practically all areas of political application there was the existence of liberal thinking. This was especially aparent in his previously mentioned appiontment of officials. Jackson considered the roles of officials fairly simple and could and should be carried out by all people not just the members of the socially and intellectually elite. The belief of complete equality is with out a doubt Jeffersonian. Despite this already democratic view Jackson took it one step further and appointed the illiterate and plain incompetant members of society to office. This was from the influence of Jefferson and his rural upbringing in which he was at the social rump of the republic. Lastly, but of equal importance was Jackson’s acheivement of president. Jackson was the very first president of the United States to have not attended college. He was completely self taught and self reliant. For someone from the backwaters of Tennessee to become president in a time of rule by the elite of the elite was revolutionary in itself. Under no other circumstances could such a leader or 
<br><br>
Words: 454
