
More than twelve million people were killed in
concentration camps, six million were Jewish. All of these
horrifying events were consequences of the evening, April
20, 1889, when the one man responsible for all of this was
born.
Adolf Hitler was born into a loving family of small
farmers and craftsmen. He had one half-sister, Angela, and
one half-brother, Alois, Jr. Hitler's mother loved him very
much and anyone could tell, because she showered him with
affection.
In his early school years, Adolf was a truly good student. 
He even took singing lessons and sang in the choir at a
Benedictine monastery. He found the church festivals
fascinating. His enthusiasm for the church soon began to
fade, though. As his teen years approached, he began to
rebel against the church and the career plans that his father
had made. These plans were for him to become a civil
servant, just as he had been. Hitler loved art and wanted to
become a painter. He refused to go by his father's plans. 
This was just one thing that him and his father did not get
along about. There really wasn't much they did agree on. 
Sometimes Alois criticized and even struck his son. 
Although they didn't get along very well, Adolf was
devastated at his father's death when he was a merely
thirteen years old. He even cried when he saw his body
laying in the casket.
Hitler was devoted to his mother and loved her deeply. 
She was very kind to him and encouraged to be an artist, or
whatever else he decided to be. He even thought of himself
as his mother's darling, and he carried her picture with him
everywhere he went.
In 1905, Hitler visited the country where he would later
become dictator. While he was there, as a pale and sickly
looking teenager, he stuck everyone as a shy and reserved
young man. After that, he spent a few months studying,
drawing in Munich, Germany.
In October of 1907, he moved to Vienna, planning to
study art. He applied to the Academy of Fine Arts Academy,
but got rejected. The next year, in December, his beloved
mother, Klara passed away. Later that year, he applied
again for the art academy, but got rejected again.
In the month of October, 1914, World War One broke
out and Hitler joined the Bovarian Army. Hitler felt he needed
to defend Germany, his adopted country. On August 4,
1918, Hitler was awarded the Iron Cross, First Class for
bravery. Then, on June28, 1919, Germany signed the Treaty
of Versailles, ending WW1.
Several years later , in 1942, Hitler and his army
shattered many lives by capturing and killing the inferior
races the slowest and most painful ways possible. The
inferior races, according to him were all Jewish people, the
terminally ill, the physically and mentally handicapped, and
anyone not of German descent. Hitler was a horrible and sick
man, who brought on tough times for all people. Many
people agree that it was very hard to speak up and if you did,
you would get killed. Hitler even had doctors testing to find
the most painful and horrible deaths on people. 
Hitler had a great relationship with his mother, but he
and his father argued most of time. His father even beat him
on occasion. Hitler was a scrawny and sickly looking boy
who only had only one friend. He had gotten rejected from
art school twice. All of this made him feel that he had no
purpose in the world. Doing these horrible things probably
made him think that he was making people feel the same
way he felt all of those years and for a small amount of time,
made him feel better about himself.
I think that the German people were willing to follow and
believe Hitler, because they had been through some rough
times and would believe anyone who said that they could
give them jobs and raise their income. They also wanted to
hear that they were the best and when he said this, he won
many Germans over.
<br><br>
Words: 685
