
The sizzling streams of sunlight were just beautifully glimmering down on the
crisp green school yard. Such a wonderful day that was. Nothing could
have ruined it. Little Jimmy, since it was such a wonderful day decided to go
to the corner store and buy himself a little treat. As little Jimmy started
walking over to the store, clouds flocked over the dazzling sun and the
sudden pitch dark meant no trouble. On the other side of the road were
three white boys from Jimmy's same school. Upon recognizing Jimmy, the
boys ran over the street to where he was. Hey Negro, what's up?, one of
the white Boy said. Did your mamma pack you enough to eat to-day?,
another hooted. Just leave me alone., Little Jimmy said Oh no, Jimmy's
really getting pist off!?, the first boy retaliated. Just shove off and let me
be, Jimmy answered. It is like this everyday, everywhere, and everytime,
people suffer discrimination. All because they have differences amongst
each other. Different beliefs, different cultures, different skin colour, all of
these act like building blocks to help construct what we know as Racism. 
Racism has become one of the many burdens amongst multi-cultural worlds
like Canada and the States. Racism is a part of each and every one of us.
No doubt, we are all racist, but this the term racism has been used too
loosely. Racism has been mutated to such an extent that it could be a reason
for war, a symbol of terrorism, and even an excuse for neglecting. Is that all
there is to it? No, actually it is just the beginning. Racism is just like warfare
in which there is no shelter and nobody is neutral. Nobody is exempt from
this demon. He has haunted us with a bitter curse. On one occasion I
remember, nobody would play with me at school. I would walk around by
myself and ask people if we could play together. Everywhere that I went,
like the process of induction, everyone would avoid me. Like two inducted
poles with the same polarity, they would just shimmer off into the distance
and continue to do whatever they're doing. Because of racial differences,
they neglect me.
People are afraid of the unknown, and it is this difference amongst people
that spread rumors and distrust amongst people. Corrupting our thoughts
and reasons, we get accustomed to thinking differences are omens.
Amongst smaller kids, there is no difficulty in getting them to all play
together. There thoughts are not totally corrupted as others. Probably the
demon has no time to bother with smaller children. As children start to grow
up, their knowledge of the world increases in astronomical figures. They
start to mature and realize the barbarous aspects of life. When this
knowledge reaches to a certain point, the demon like racism comes after
them. The child begins to understand the term racism and is encouraged to
use it in part of there everyday speech. Then when one walks around the
school ground, you wouldn't see children from different ethnic groups
playing together. They have become insoluble to each other and will never
then mix again.
Interaction between each other thus terminates. Nobody benefits from this
kind of behavior except for the demon that haunts us. Racism, like the
demonic figure it has imposed on us is the reason for distrust, disloyal, and
discrimination amongst each and every one of us. 
<br><br>
Words: 573
