
History: American:
air strike 
March 04, 1998
IRAQ AND THE UNITED STATES In the past seven years
there has been a great deal of tension concerning the United
States and Iraq. The United States have been discussing
conducting air strikes against Iraq. The 1991 Gulf War may
not have been as successful as believed. The United States
spent millions of American dollars to support the war effort in
the 1991 Gulf War. Taxpayers money is not the only
expendable thing during the 1991 Gulf War. Many United
States Soldiers are now suffering from an unknown Gulf War
Illness that allegedly the government knows nothing about.
The United States is also seeking American support in an air
strike in Iraq, but it is evident that the government is lacking
this support. The United States Government needs to realize
that they are killing Iraqis but the moral, economy and
patriotism of the whole country. The United States is suffering
from homelessness, poverty and hunger. In many cities in the
world including in Iraq people can be found in famine.
However, the United States is spending U.S. tax dollars in
vain. Many congressmen are also unhappy in with the way
the U.S. tax dollars are being spent. Senator John Warner,
Republican Virginia, a senior member of the Senate Armed
Services is very unhappy of the unnecessary spending of the
U.S. dollar. Warner stated: Based on briefings tax payers
have spent $750 million on the Gulf War effort, (USA TODAY
2/27/98). This outrage spending could be used to solve the
United States economical burdens, and it would be horrible if
the world's only remaining superpower uses its awesome
might to slather a stricken little country where hunger is a
daily menace. The U.S Patriotic Spirit is at question with the
United States People. At the end of the 1991 Gulf War the
country went into a great recession. Many Americans lost
their jobs and homes. Americans according to a recent CNN
Poll are not supporting an air strike. The poll stated: 41
percent of people favoring an armed strike, with 50 percent
opposed and the rest unsure, (Charleston Gazette). After the
1991 Gulf War many war veterans have had many medical
problems. One is known as Gulf War Illness. The Untied
States Government hid circumstantial information from the
U.S. people. A majority of the troops may have been exposed
to hazardous particles of uranium from shells and wrecked
Iraq vehicles. The vast majority of soldiers who had physical
contact with Iraqi vehicles were on post war missions to clear
the battlefield or to destroy what remained of their equipment.
One soldier Victor Suell, a radio operator with the Marines
had one kidney removed from the effects of the uranium. Suell
stated: Nobody ever told us to stay away from the vehicles
that might have been contaminated with depleted uranium,
(USA TODAY 3/02/98). The U.S. Government failed to inform
the soldiers of the dangers of the shelling. What else is the
government failing to bring forward? Is Clinton threatening to
have an air strike to cover up his alleged affair with a former
White House Intern? The U.S. has been through many wars
with the majority of the public support. The United States is
just coming out of a recession. The United States
Government needs to take care of the Gulf War Veterans and
the homeless on the harsh streets in this country. WORK
CITED IRAQ crisis. Charleston Gazette.
www.wvgazette.com (Feb 21, 1998). Group warns of new
Gulf War exposure. USA TODAY. www.usatoday.com
(March 2, 1998). Iraq deployment costs top $600million.
USA TODAY. www.usatoday.com (Feb 27, 1998). 
<br><br>
Words: 603
