
ENL 1
Modern advertising companies rely heavily on subliminal messaging to entice their target audiences. Advertisements are often crafted for the purpose of appealing to specific characteristics in the hopes of drawing the attention and appealing to the senses of prospective buyers. Tobacco companies have become notorious for the implementation of such techniques. The images portrayed in many of “big tobacco’s” ads stimulate a variety of senses and emotions. One common tactic used by Camel cigarettes (a subsidiary of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.) is to isolate and promote life’s pleasures, and American patriotism. A specific Camel ad found in Elle, a common, upscale women’s magazine is a perfect example of such advertising. 
“Pleasure To Burn” is the slogan centered upon the advertisement’s page. Above the slogan, “CAMEL” is written, all letters in Camel’s trademark font. A beautiful orange sunset serves as a mesmerizing background to an attractive, young women relaxing and enjoying a cigarette on the back of a pristine classic car. The image is painted in the style of the early ‘50s “pin-up doll” image. Smoke lazily wafts up through the lettering from the cigarette positioned directly beneath the word “Burn”. The woman relaxes lazily, eyes closed, facing up towards the orange sunset. There is no question that she is blissfully enjoying her cigarette, and her surroundings. She is dressed in the uniform of a diner waitress, complete with hat, apron, and “JANE” stenciled upon her left breast patch. Rather than conjure the stereotypical images of young women on roller-skates rushing around busily serving patrons, the subject of this ad is very much relaxes, and very much alone. Rather than appear to be sexual, her short and tight uniform conveys a sense of sensuality as she reclines, comfortable, confident, and independent. The entire focus of the advertisement invites the viewer to partake in the clearly pleasurable experience of smoking a Camel cigarette, specifically to escape the bustling world around us. The sensual imagery further pushes the same lazy, comfortable, yet extremely pleasurable experience of smoking Camels. 
The ad clearly attempts to represent a truly American theme. The diner era reflected by the images is solely the historical product of the “good ol’ US of A.” The classic automobile, in mint condition, aquamarine coloring, and white hard-top set against the beautiful and unpolluted orange sky makes every effort to glorify the past, and to seemingly imply the universal and timeless appeal of Camel cigarettes. The red-haired waitress, in her classic uniform and white apron even sports a more classic American hairstyle, as well as proudly displaying “JANE” upon her breast patch. The name further seems to emphasize that Camels cigarettes are for everyone; every Jane could be like the waitress in the ad. Camel’s logo sporting the label underneath “Since 1913” proundly invites thoughts of Camel’s longevity in America, truly solidifying it’s role as an American classic.
The rebellious nature of the images is slightly more subtle but equally powerful in its impact. Upon close inspection, the waitress is wearing shiny new roller-blades rather than roller-skates. Her youthful figure also aids in the imagery of a somewhat rebellious and strong woman. As she smokes with such a sense of luxury and abandonment, one can notice her empty serving tray lying on the car beside her. In addition, she is still in uniform, all the way up to her pinstriped cap. One imagines that she is only on her break, or perhaps taking one without anyone noticing. The empty car implies that the vehicle is her own, and not that of a patron. She seems, despite her conformity in uniform and accoutrement, to be calling all the shots. The fact that not another single human being can be seen further implies that our female protagonist is in her own world, and needs no one. It is doubtful that this sense of singular independence would be lost among the subscribers of Elle magazine, most likely a strong female audience. 
The mixture of these images serves to provide a clean, packaged message with an almost aesthetic quality; Camel cigarettes are for the independent, hard-working woman who seeks pleasure and social freedom without necessitating any need or help from others. The ad’s appearance in the modern fashion magazine Elle, further implies that the female target audience would find appeal is a somewhat artistic ad portraying such qualities, and their obvious benefits. Even her blue and orange roller-blades are color coordinating with car and the sky above. The ad definitely speaks volumes with the words “Pleasure to Burn.” The underlying theme strongly supported by the subliminal imagery serves Camel’s purposes wholly. By conveying a product associated with pleasure, relaxation, patriotism, sensuality, independence, and rebelliousness, Camel successfully utilizes advertising to target and appeal to specific audiences. Every aspect of the full-page ad creams to the viewer to smoke for pleasure, for independence, and nonconformity, and of course, for America. 
<br><br>
Words: 813
