
Sometimes girls and boys seem to avoid the company of one another,
but finally everyone find something common in each other and fall in love
at least once. Actually You are just afraid of making serious relationship,
because You do not know what the girl thinks and feels about you. In
general the first time is always more complex. The men are so confused
about what women think about them that it can create some obsessions.
It can lower Your self-esteem. Do not let it happen! Despite of the
difficulties it is exciting and anxious process. It will be hard to get
someone's love. In return You will feel like a bird flying, everything will
sing around and your heart will jump inside when You see that You have
taken a liking to her. How do You see that!? She will smile, laugh after
every your silly joke and hesitate to look into your eyes. If she will not,
she is not fallen in love. Let's imagine the calling to someone for the first
date. Probably you are nervous and afraid of her refusal. Who makes the
first step have to be brave and known that everybody have to do it some
day. You have to know the Estonian proverb, The brave beginning is a
half of victory. For Your better feeling You may invent some reason for
calling. For example ask something about a homework, but do not seem
to her as a foolish. First of all you have to insist in your mind that you are
like every other boy. Everyone have something interesting and attractive
which can put the girls to lose their heads. Perhaps You are funny
speaker or good listener. In the last case You have to give many
questions to get her meet with You. You have to realize your best sides of
character and use them in calling. Do not be selfish, at least in the first
time. Next, You have to be prepared to lose - do not except your failure
and do not give up after it. People are learning from mistakes. Now let's
go to call. Oh, Your voice and the style of communicating have to be
something different from talking with friends! Do not use a foul language.
First of all You have to be very polite in communicating with her parents
in the case they take a phone. You could introduce yourself and ask for
her with the official and calm voice, Good afternoon, I am Bobby Dolt
and I would like to speak with Ann Smith. Is she home at home now?.
You have a time to relax and forget about all Your weaknesses. Now
She probably comes. It will be better if You create the image of ladies'
man and chatty boy and mix their a little bit sexual appetite. But do not
overstrain with that stuff. Now she is saying, Helllooo and You will
show the manliness and other skills You have learned. Your voice must
be soft, easygoing, but dynamic. It means not boring. Hey, If You feel
yourself in a right way forget about Your homework! Let Your inspiration
to fly. Do not disturb her for a few hours. Be in short. You just have to
invite her somewhere. Please do not make some terrible noises like in car
crush or the water falling in bathroom. In the case You cannot exist
without them You can sing like birds do. Do not say her such things like,
What the hell are You doing their? Or What a horrible voice You have
by phone!. I remain You that You had a goal to create some friendship.
Follow my advises and You can get Cindy Crawford to Your callers. If
You are good reader and smart boy You have to go through it and You
might see her next time in the theater, cinema or night club. You will be
well done if during the next meeting she will be merry and kind with You.
Your relationships depend mostly on Your communication in the first few
weeks. It does not mean that later You can turn into a rude imp. Actually
all people have to relate toward each other in a polite manner and do not
hold anger in their hearts. Always take a stand to others like You want
them to attitude toward You. 
<br><br>
Words: 730
