
Question 4: There are many techniques which have been developed to increase the efficiency of memory . Select 3 techniques , discuss them in detail and present examples of when they can be used.
In the world today it is a must to be able to remember things. Memory is a big part in everyone’s life. Their is hardly a day that goes by when you do not have to remember something. If someone doesn’t have a great memory it could cause somewhat of a down fall in their professional life. In this paper I will discuss three different memorization habits and how they can be contributed to one’s everyday lifestyle. One of many ways that help people memorize things is in a verbal sense called Rhymes. Rhyming is an easy way for someone to memorize certain things. This method is most common with children in school. Many people that grow up still remember these little detailed Rhymes that help them get threw school. Rhymes are nothing other than little saying’s which sometimes make no sense , but when repeated in your mind it helps 
your recall what is need to know . The Rhyme that I remember best was used in math class “ I ate and ate until I was sick on the floor eight times eight equals sixty-four ‘’ that saying is really kind of ridiculous , but I always new what eight times eight was . There are so many saying’s out there and everyone of them will help anyone memorize. Rhymes have been and always will have a big impact on helping people in memorization. Another strategy to help on to memorize things is called Acrostics. Acrostics is 
nothing more than a saying in which the first letter of each word of the saying is the cue to help recall information you need to know . This method is very similar to the method of Rhyming , but you only use the one letter from each word to represent the cue for your needed information. One of the Acrostic phrases that many people were taught for learning notes in music class was ‘’ Every good boy does fine ‘’ . This saying helps people remember notes E, G, B, D, and F , which are five main chords, in order , used in music. Acrostic is not used as much as Rhyme; however, though they are very similar in style. Many people use this method , but really have no idea what it is called nor really care as long as it works , and it does . All people tend to do things the easy way , and their is nothing wrong with that as long as it works . There are certain methods for everything and it always helps to have some help when needed.The third method that will be discussed is the method of Loci. The method of 
Loci involves taking an imaginary walk along a familiar path where images of items to be remembered are associated with certain locations . The first step is to commit to memory a series of loci, or places along a path. Usually these loci are specific locations in your home or neighborhood. Then envision each thing you want to remember in one of these 
locations. Try to form vivid images . When you need to remember the things , imagine yourself on your path , which should serve as cues for the retrieval of the images you have formed ( Wayne Weiten, 2000 ). The usefulness of Loci helps assure yourself of remembering items in a certain order and the order is 
determined by the location sequence along the certain path. In this paper I have discussed and gave examples for three different ways to improve one’s memory. There are many other methods in to help with memorization ;however , I believe these are the three most common used help methods. Each method has it’s own direct way in helping one to memorize something for long periods of time. Memorizing is a everyday thing that is nearly necessary for everyday life. People have methods for doing everything and just because you do something one way doesn’t make that the only right way. Most methods are not tought ,some are just distinguish to what is available. No one can remember everything , but with a little help it makes it somewhat easier to try. Some methods are learned from experience . Experience helps the person know what they are doing and then one can do the same task in a certain way which is easier to them . Everyone forgets things every now and again no matter who you 
are. People usually forget things when something else is on there mind , but their is something for everything to help us memorize what it is we need to do.
<br><br>
Words: 813
