
03-16-00
George W. Bush
If I had to choose a candidate based on, background, position on issues, and intangibles I think it would be George W. Bush. I would choose George W. Bush because he supports some issues that Im interested in and he seems like the kind of guy who will do a good job. I think that with George W. Bush as president, the United States will become a better place for everyone. In this essay I will discuss why I think he would be a good president based on issues, background and his intangibles. 
I also support George W. Bush because he has a good background. Not only was he involved in politics, but he is has also been involved in business. This is a well educated well experienced man. Here is some background information on George W. Bush that shows some of the things that he has done to this day, he was born July 6, 1946 and grew up in Midland and Houston, Texas. He received a bachelors degree from Yale University and an MBA from Harvard Business School. He served as an F-102 pilot for the Texas Air National Guard. He began his career in the oil and gas business in Midland in 1975 and worked in the energy industry until 1986. After working on his fathers 1988 presidential campaign he assembled the group of partners that purchased the Texas Rangers baseball franchise in 1989 and which later built the Rangers new home, the Ballpark at Arlington. He served as managing general partner of the Texas Rangers until he was elected Governor on November 8, 1994, with 53.5 percent of the vote. Governor Bush and his wife, Laura, a former teacher and librarian who grew up in Midland, live in the historic Governors Mansion in Austin with their 18 year old twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna, their dog, Spot, and their three cats, India, Cowboy and Ernie. Governor Bush is a Methodist and has served on the boards of various charitable, business and civic organizations. To this day George W. Bush remains as the governor of Texas, and has done many good things for the state of Texas.
One of the biggest things that made me notice George W. Bush, was his ideas on taxes. He basically wants to replace the current five rate structure of 15, 28, 31, 36, and 39.6 percent with four, lower rates: 10, 15, 25, and 33 percent. Although some of the other candidates also support a tax cut plan, some of them have ridiculously low rates, Keyes wants to abolish income tax and Buchannon wants to have a flat 16 % rate, lets face it, these are to low and that would not give enough funding for the government, then programs regarding education, health care, and defense would be greatly affected. Then there are other candidates who support tax cuts, but only directed to those who make lower incomes, and that is not fair. So as you can see George W. Bush has a plan that can benefit everyone and it wont have a negative effect on the economy. Another issue that makes me support George W. Bush is his ideas on gun laws. I think that his gun laws would make this country allot safer and it would save allot of lives. George W. Bush basically shares some of the same ideas on some important issues and that is my biggest reason for supporting him.
Another thing that is great about George W. Bush is that he has good leadership skills and he does what is good for the people. He is a loving family man that has done so many good things for the state of Texas and I think that he would do a good job at being president. He also seems like a caring man due to all the things he has done for children in Texas, it really looks like he is focusing on the well being of the nations children, and that shows that he is a caring person. Also, he is not negative campaigning, so that shows that he has faith in his ideas and himself. This is the kind of president that I would want and that is why I am supporting him.
In conclusion, if I had to choose a president based on his background, his ideas on issues, or his intangibles, I would choose George W. Bush. I think that he would make an excellent president and I think that he would do allot of good things to improve this countries flaws. If you are looking for a caring and motivated president that will make changes that benefit everyone I think that George W. Bush should be your first choice.
<br><br><b>Bibliography</b><br><br>
treter
<br><br>
Words: 792
