
Romeo and Juliet Essay
In Shakespeare’s tragedies the main characters die in the end, and in his comedies people marry. Since Romeo and Juliet is a tragedy, Romeo and Juliet are going to die in the end. Some events have to lead to their deaths, and someone makes these events happen. The people who started it all and did something that led to all the other events that caused the death of the couple. The Capulets and Montagues would be the most responsible ones for the deaths of Romeo and Juliet because if their families didn’t start the fighting, and they didn’t continue it, nothing bad would have happened.
The first lines of the book tell us about the hate and envy between the two houses. The whole fight started a long time ago with really stupid little things, and then grew into huge fights involving many people. No leader of either household even thought about making peace, they were all too busy to spoil everything for the rival family. Only after the death of their children they realized how wrong they were. 
Romeo and Juliet first met each other at a party at the Capulets house. They fall in love with each other at the first sight without knowing that they are from families who hate each other, and when they do learn about it, it is too late. Juliet realizes that it was a mistake to fall in love with Romeo, because he is one of the people she should watch out for. He is her first and only love, but he is an enemy of her family. Lucky for Romeo, Juliet is smart, and such dumb thing as hate between their parents wouldn’t stop her from loving Romeo and getting married with him. She is sorry that their families are enemies, though, because everything would be much easier if they weren’t. So this is the first time when the hate between Capulets and Montagues becomes problem to Romeo and Juliets happiness.
Only after their children die, the Montagues and Capulets come to their senses. The Prince accuses them of killing Romeo and Juliet. The Prince makes them see how wrong they were all the time, that all because of their hate, because they couldn’t let their children love each other, Romeo and Juliet died. After that, Capulets and Montagues decide to call it quits. No more fighting, and Montague even says that he will make a gold statue of Juliet, but what is that going to do? It is too late, nothing will bring them back.
It is totally Capulets’ and Montagues’ fault that Romeo and Juliet died. If they didn’t hate each other so much, they would let their children get married, and they would be able to live happily ever after. There was only one person that realized how unreasonable the fighting was and even tried to stop it, and he was Benvolio. Benvolio was a Montague, but the Capulets didn’t have a peacemaker like Benvolio. They only had Tybalt, whose only goal was to destroy all the Montagues. We don’t really know how Romeo and Juliet’s parents would have reacted if they had known that their children were in love with each other. Romeo and Juliet didn’t even try to tell them about love between them because they were afraid that their parents wouldn’t understand, but maybe they would have. But, Capulet and Montague learned about their children’s love when they were already dead. It is still mostly Capulets’ and Montagues’ fault that Romeo and Juliet died, but maybe it was just their fate to die. 
<br><br>
Words: 602
