
War On Drugs
In today’s society, the war on drugs has become a major issue in our cities and the business community. Many cities have started programs to make the situation better, but some have failed and the situation has become worse. The root of all the problems discussed in this case study, can be linked to drugs. There are many organizations and volunteer community groups as well as law enforcement, that are continuously trying to make our cities safe. This struggle is know globally as the “War on Drugs”. 
Drugs and Children
The war on drugs is a very big part of our society. We face difficult decisions everyday dealing with drugs and how they affect our cities. Our children play a big role in that society, and they are a major factor on the war against drugs. We try to keep children away from the drug situation, but you cannot isolate them forever. Children will have to face the issue as they get older, or even while they are young. We must teach our children about the issues on drugs and make sure they are aware of the dealings that go on. Most children cannot speak to their parents about drugs, and those are the children who are usually doing drugs. If children cannot be open with their parents, they will find some other means of dealing with drug issues.
History
Nearly thirty years ago, the Nixon administration was the first administration to declare the “war” on drugs. President Nixon is credited with setting up the first methadone centers and abstinence programs cross the country. At the time these programs received two-thirds of the federal drug budget and the results were: crime rates fell and fewer people died of overdose. The “Just Say No” movement (led by first lady Nancy Reagan) was coupled with rigorous law enforcement and produced solid results. By 1992, for example, marijuana use by high school students had dropped significantly (http://ehostvgw15.epnet.com).
The Controlled Substances Act (CSA), Title II of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, is the legal foundation of the government's fight against the abuse of drugs and other substances. This law is a consolidation of numerous laws regulating the manufacture and distribution of narcotics, stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, anabolic steroids, and chemicals used in the illicit production of controlled substances. (http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/briefingbook/page9.htm) 
Drug Enforcement Agency
The mission of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is to enforce the controlled substances laws and regulations of the United States and bring to the criminal and civil justice system of the United States, or any other competent jurisdiction, those organizations and principal members of organizations, involved in the growing, manufacture, or distribution of controlled substances appearing in or destined for illicit traffic in the United States; and to recommend and support non-enforcement programs aimed at reducing the availability of illicit controlled substances on the domestic and international markets. (http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/briefingbook/page2.htm). 
The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) was formed as a specialized branch of the justice department in 1973. This specialized bureau is on the front lines of the “War on Drugs” every day. The DEA is not only concerned with assisting local law enforcement, but a global policing as well. 
Drugs in the Workplace
Many chambers of commerce throughout the nation have put Drug-Free Workplace programs into effect. The drug-free workplace program addresses not only issues in the business community, but the society as well. Statistics show that 70 percent of illegal drug users are employed, and 44 percent of drug users sell drugs to co-workers (http://ehostvgw6.epnet.com). The U.S. Department of Labor estimates that drug use in the workplace costs employers $75 billion to $100 billion annually in lost time. Sixty-five percent of all accidents on the job are directly related to drugs. Substance abusers are absent three times more often and use 16 times as many health care benefits as non-abusers (http://ehastvgw6.epnet.com). 
Many companies are aware of the drug problems within the office and are taking action to fix the situation. There are companies that have drug-screening test to employees to make sure that they are not using drug substances. The company must have a suspicion of that employee of using the drugs before giving the drug test. In the American Management Association survey, 92 percent of testing companies use urine samples, 15 percent use blood samples, and 2 percent use hair samples (http://ehastvgw6.epnet.com). Many employers will try to help their employees who are having a problem with drug addiction. Some will try to get the family involved and may use a rehabilitation group. Some will terminate the employee. There is no easy way to solve the problem of drugs in the workplace, but taking action requires determination, willingness, time, and being able to support the person with the funds needed. 
<br><br>
Words: 796
