
Macbeth
If it hadn&#8217;t been for the three witches, Macbeth would
never have killed Duncan nor Banquo. Macbeth, also would
not have been killed my Macduff. The three witches are the
reason that everything happened the way the they did.
In the beginning of the play, the three witches
prophecized that Macbeth would become Thane of Cawdor adn
the King of Scotland. In the near future Macbeth became the
Thane of Cawdor because of his valiant efforts in the war. 
Macbeth started to think about the witches proheciesand
started to become a little ambitious. With the constant
nagging and mockery of Lady Macbeth, Macbeth decides to go
through with the murder of Duncan. Thus, another one of the
witches prophecies was fulfilled. The witches also
prophecized that Banquo&#8217;s sons will be kings. In the worry
of Banquo finding out about the murder of Duncan and the
thought of Banquo&#8217;s son, Fleance, Macbeth hires a few
asassins to murder Banquo and his son.
Later,three ghosts appear in front of Macbeth. First,
an armored head appears and warns Macbeth to beware of
Macduff. Second, a bloody child appears telling Macbeth
that no man born a woman should harm him. Third, a child
holding a tree, tells Macbeth that he is safe until Birnham
Woods comes to Dunsinane. After the three ghosts visit
Macbeth, the apparition of Banquo appears. Following Banquo
is seven of his descendants, all of which were deceased
kings.
The first of the three warinings from the ghosts comes
true when macduff allies with Malcolm, one of Duncan&#8217;s sons. 
Together they plan to retake the throne of Scotland. 
Macduff and Malcolm plan to use the leaves and branches of
Birnham Woods as camouflage. Before Macbeth is killed, he
remembers the third ghost that stated that no man born a
woman should harm him. Macduff then explains that he he was
razed out of his mother&#8217;s stomach, which means that he was
not born a woman. All three of the warnings from the ghosts
came true.
This is why I believe that if Macbeth had never spoken
to the three witches, none of this would have happened.
<br><br>
Words: 356
