
Macbeth Essay
Consider the following as possibilities and as realities. One man, born high in society of his day, commits murder in order to raise this status and his power even further that he had previously existed. Another, born into the most exalted level of influence and wealth in that same society, and believes that he can tell an individual's true character simply by what he sees in the face. A third person, friend and colleague of the first one also wants greater power, wealth, and glory, not for himself but for his descendants. All the men are part of the of each other's society, in all that the latter term suggest. The wife of the first man is as power-hungry as he is. They have no children. The second man who has two sons, and the third that is blessed with one. These four people blend in a variety of beliefs in fate, God, and the supernatural, beliefs that each of the three men of influence holds dear. 
Macbeth is presented as a mature man of definitely established character, successful in certain fields of activity and enjoying an enviable reputation. Macbeth possessed everything required to be a good king but instead made a few poor decisions, which caused him to be seen as an evil king. Despite Macbeth's evil he was still an admirable character and possessed redeeming qualities such as his extreme loyalty towards King Duncan. He shows his loyalty by being captain of Duncan's army.
Throughout the play we see Macbeth's conscience eat him alive through different forms of hallucinations. During the soliloquy in Act II scene I lines 32-34 Macbeth sees a dagger that he will use to kill Duncan with. The dagger is covered with blood. This shows how his conscience is causing him to think about what he going to do. Another hallucination surfaces after Macbeth has his friend Banquo killed. After Banquo is killed Macbeth goes to sit down at the table where his guests have gathered for the feast. The table is full because he Banquo's ghost is sitting in the last seat. The fact that Macbeth sees Banquo's ghost is another example of how his conscience is pricking at him. He is bringing regret what he has done and realizing the consequences for it. 
<br><br>
Words: 384
