
Elizabeth the Virgin Queen
The movie Elizabeth, the tale of Britain&#8217;s &#8220;Virgin
Queen,&#8221; is an enthralling movie with intriguing effects,
magnificent scenery and spectacular acting. With astonishing
assets such as the deep storyline of a heroine, splendid
cinematography, talented actors , and masterful director
techniques aid the movie to become an outstanding peace of
work that can not be missed. Elizabeth transports the viewer
into the realm of the Monarchy and has them holding their
breath.
This epic drama is portrayed as a powerful and meaningful
story. The film shows the rigorous rise of Queen Elizabeth
from her rotten beginnings as Queen Mary&#8217;s hated half-sister
to her reign as one of England&#8217;s most successful Monarchs.
Elizabeth details a specific political process as much as
anything else, a process that enables the determined young
queen to assert herself over male domination and to
consolidate her rule. This throws the viewer into the
compelling world of England&#8217;s Monarchy during the middle
ages. And simultaneously portrays Elizabeth as A role model
to striving young women everywhere.
This wonderful and powerful production is aided
immeasurably by the photogenic quality of the twelve gothic
churches and castles in North England that were used for
filming locations. These locations perfectly complemented
the chiaroscuro lighting effects. The engulfing soundtrack
and the fluid cinematography allows the film to encompass
the viewer into the depths of the middle ages. Darkly and
effectively lit by cinematographer Remi Aderfarasin and
lushly illustrated by production designer John Myhre and
costume designer Alexandra Byrne, Elizabeth is a magnificent
artwork.
Cate Blanchet gives a riveting performance in the film.
Blanched not only looks like Elizabeth, but she interprets
the part of a determined young lady riddled by the
uncertainty of a precarious position, with great precision. 
Her time on the screen is a performance of worth, from the
energetic, naive young girl, to the hellcat virgin queen,
she literally melts white steel in the hysterical, complex
spectacle. She breathes life into the revered historical
figure, transforming her from an old picture on an
encyclopedia page to a flesh-and-blood individual whom an
audience can root for and care about. The film's flowing
simplicity and powerfully engaging momentum makes
Elizabeth a majestic ode to a unique woman who shaped an
era. 
The supporting cast in this feature is also extremely
talented. With Geoffrey Rush as the crucial role of
Walsingham he brings sinisterly to the plot and is down
right evil. The hellasious Mendel played by Christopher
Eccleston brings out antagonism and mutiny. Also Sir Richard
Attenboroughs ,a methodical conniver who helps Elizabeth
consolidate her power, performance complements Blanchetts
tremendous performance with equally impressive acting. Other
actors such as John Gielgud as the Pope and Fanny Ardent as
Mary of Guise also give a wonderful performance in this
feature.
Directed by Shekhar Kapur, Elizabeth is a master piece
of film that often combines the poetic rolling hills of
England with demented and dark pictures of battle and
imprisonment. Kapurs accent on visceral and textured
lighting is wonderful. His camera is always imaginative as
well, for example until she shines forth at the glorious end
of the film in all her frontal iconicity, Elizabeth is
continuously seen through distorting glass and flowing
veils. The best visual effects of all are the dynamic
close-ups and always moving camera that are continuous
throughout the running time.
Overall this film making con not be put aside. It is a
top-notch movie highly recommended not just for the
beautiful scenes and impressionable costuming but for the
powerful story it represents and portrays. Anyone from
teenagers on can learn and appreciate this film. It is a
must see that will keep you on your toes and educate you at
the same time.
<br><br>
Words: 620
