
How To Do Frames On Web Sites
Dividing a web page into frames is quite simple. Frames 
organize web pages by dividing them into rows or columns. The 
basic concept of frames is that each frame is a regular, complete 
html document. That means more than on one page is viewed in one 
single screen. This allows the viewers to stay one page other than 
having to keep on going to new pages. 
If a person wanted to divide a page into 2 side by side frames, 
he/she should put one complete html document in the left frame and 
another complete html document in the right frame. In order to make 
this happen, making an additional html document is needed. This 
third html document contains the tags that specify what 
goes where. That is actually its only function. 
The two tags used are the and the tags. 
A tag is a container tag, and a tag is not. For 
those who don't know what that means, a container tag has an 
opening and a closing . The tag specifies 
the html documents and whether the frame should have a border or a 
scrollbar for each html document. The tag does all the 
dividing. It specifies a few things regarding how to divide them up. 
(Note: If using web page providers such as angelfire and geocities, 
make sure the page that the frames code is going on is set for 
advanced html.) 
The most popular way frames are organized is by using two 
columns. One is simply being used for the menu of the web site, and 
the other being used as the main page to view a specific page within 
the web site. The examples used will include how to create frames 
showing the division of the page into two columns and also showing 
the division of the page into two rows. 
First of all, name the three html documents index.html, the 
page used for dividing it into frames; side1.html, the left column of the 
page used for the menu; and main.html, the page for viewing a 
specific page within the web site. Make sure the following html code is 
used in the index.html page: *FRAMESET cols=100,*”* 
src=”side1.html”* . The * 
simply means the space that is left over on the web page. The 100 
means that the first frame is 100 pixels wide. That code should be 
used to divide a page into two columns. Be sure to adjust it to the 
size needed for the web site. 
Dividing a page into rows uses the same concept; however, the 
code is slightly different. Use the same three html 
documents: index.html, side1.html, and main.html. This code should 
be used in the index.html page: 
src=”side1.html”* . 
A person can also decide whether he/she wants the frame to 
have scrollbars or borders. It should be specified in the tag 
like this: 
src=”side1.html” scrolling=”no” border=”false”* 
src=”main.html” scrolling=”yes” border=”false”*. That code will make 
the left column not to have scrollbars whereas the main column will 
have scrollbars. 
It is possible to divide a page into more than two frames, but 
they must be specified in the tag, and more html 
documents will have to be made. For example, 
rows=”65,*,65”* will divide a page into three rows in which the 
first and last will be 65 pixels tall, while the middle will be what is left 
over. 
Sometimes when too many frames are used, it is confusing to 
the viewer. Using only a few frames will make viewing a web site 
easier and more organized. Viewing web pages in frames make 
visiting it easier and more enjoyable. Looking at nice layouts will keep 
the visitors coming back. After figuring out how to do frames, 
everyone will realize how easy it really is. 
<br><br>
Words: 627
