
Internet Advertising 
There are two primary ways to advertise on the Internet: 
1.Register your Web site with major search engines so Internet
visitors can find you. 
2.Place an ad banner for your site on another Web site that has a
lot of traffic (viewers). Ad banners allow viewers to link to your
site when they click on the banner. 
Internet Advertising Advantages 
Relatively cost-effective. The costs can also be independent of
the size of the audience. For example, a Web presence will cost
the same regardless of how many viewers your site has. (You will,
however, need to make sure your Internet Service Provider can
handle the volume of viewers you anticipate having.) 
Advertisers can target specific types of viewers by positioning
an ad banner on related Web sites. For example, if you're
targeting people seeking information on a specific topic, you can
purchase ad space on Web pages that are related to this category
in the major search engines (Yahoo, Infoseek, Lycos, WONET -
The Women's Online Network, etc.). So, an organic herb farmer
selling through mail order might advertise through the organic
foods or gourmet cooking category. The indexing structure of
these sites allows you to target your audience by geographic
location and related interest area. 
Messages can be timely because editing the content is often easy
and instantaneous. 
Ads on the Internet can be interactive. You can request viewer
feedback, take orders or answer questions instantly. 
Ad banners can run with as much frequency as you choose. The
Internet is constantly available! 
Internet advertisers can potentially reach a global audience. Aside
from language barriers, anyone at any location in the world can
access information about your products or services. 
Internet Advertising Disadvantages 
Internet advertising should not be approached in a vacuum. 
Instead, it should be one component of a comprehensive Internet
Marketing strategy. 
Although the popularity of the Internet is rising remarkably, it is
difficult to gage the impact of advertising on the Internet. 
The range of costs to advertise on the Internet can vary greatly. It
is best to compare a number of highly-frequented sites to
determine the best way to spend your advertising dollars. 
<br><br>
Words: 359
