
Extremities
In Thomas Hardy's Tess of the Durbervilles, Tess worked in two extremely 
differentiating places. Both Talbothay's and Flintcomb Ash represented a time in her life 
whether it be favorable or horrid. Both of these spots contributed a deep meaning to the 
novel.
The happiest days of Tess's life were spent on a dairy farm called Talbothay's. It 
was there that she met Angel Claire, with whom she had desperately fallen in love with 
and married. Talbothay's was used as a symbol of grandeur in Tess's life. It was there 
where she found meaning in her life for the first time in the novel and became content 
with herself. However, it all came to an abrupt end when she married Angel and told him 
of her affair with her cousin Alex. Angel was devastated and left her to fend for herself. 
This is when her life got much harder. Through a friend, she got a job working for 
Flintcomb Ash. It was a physically exhausting job, in which she had utter hatred for. 
While there she ran into her cousin Alex. This only worsened her terrible state of mind. 
From then on she longed for the days with Angel at Talbothay's.
Talbothay's and Flintcomb Ash differ extremely in their descriptions. Talbothay's 
was a Utopia in Tess's life. It was depicted with luscious greenery and rolling hills. It
was 
located in the Vale of Froom, which was known for its rich and fertile soil. There
nothing 
could bother tess. Flintcomb Ash was a barren wastelan characterized by misery and
pain. 
It was a cruel place in which Tess spent the worst days of her life. There she found the 
meaning of true wretchedness, but at the same time began to appreciate her days at 
Talbothay's.
The descriptions Hardy used to depict the two places were central to the meaning 
of the work. The descriptive writing lets tthe reader not only see both places, but feel 
them as well. This allows the reader to find apathy for Tess's situation and take pity on 
her.
The contrast made between talbothay's and Flintcomb Ash was used to symbolize 
the enormous conflict Tess's life dealt with. Through this type of writing the reader
begins 
to see that no matter how bad a person might think they have it, someone else has always 
got it worse.
<br><br><b>Bibliography</b><br><br>
Bloom, Harold. T.S. Eliot. Pennsylvania:Chelsea House Publishers,1999. 60-68.
Curley/Kramer, eds. Modern American Literature:Vol. 1. New York:Frederick Ungar
Publishing Company, 1969. 340-341.
Perkins, George, ed. Benet's Reader' Encyclopedia of American Literature. New 
York: Harper Collins Publishers, 1991.300-301.
<br><br>
Words: 391
